Jeremy kinck is president at refugees
International he's a former official at
within the Obama Administration working
on humanitarian assistance and joins us
now from Washington DC good to have you
with us sir uh on the program I mean
you've come across situations like war
and conflict Aid is always required by
innocent populations caught in the
crossfire before we talk about Gaza
during your time in the Obama
Administration what's the nearest
example of sort of the genocid like
conditions seeing in Gaza that you had
to experience and deal
with well we faced conflict and uh you
know violent obstruction of Aid efforts
in a range of places we you know we saw
this with our partners in Syria um you
know a lot of I think the the the battle
damage patterns that are visible in in
Gaza today look a lot like what Assad
did to Aleppo for example um similar uh
tactics of obstructing Aid um in the war
in Yemen uh you know so there are
absolutely precedents for what we're
seeing I think what is one of the things
that's unique about Gaza is seeing the
convergence of a lot of those different
difficulties all coming together to make
it one of the most challenging
environments for delivering Aid in in
recent memory I mean you know how the
system works from within conflict erupts
politicians react when do they call the
Aid workers in for that meeting or are
you already in there listening to how
this situation
develops well there have been Aid groups
operating in Gaza for you know for for
decades and many of the eight
organizations that have been have been
working there have long-standing
operations in Gaza and have been forced
to significantly scale those back as a
result of the the difficulties of
accessing the the territory now during
the the conflict and as a result of the
well documented obstruction by the
Israeli military just trying to get an
idea of the behind the scenes chitchat I
mean obviously you're not privy to
what's going on right now but we sort of
want to try and get the methodology of
how the system works I mean obviously
that there is an ongoing scenario in
Gaza right now that we've been seeing
for seven months and was wondering how
how far and how quickly you know us a
for example would get involved Samantha
powerheads that right now at the moment
I was wondering you know where would she
come into that conversation uh and how
how quickly or how soon has she been
involved in that do you
think uh so the role that usaid would
play Within the US government
deliberations is typically to you know
provide some of the ground truth of
conditions to talk about you know they
are a channel for relaying a lot of what
they are hearing and seeing from their
humanitarian Partners so you know what
what is the ground truth that their
partners are relaying about the
difficulties they're facing about the
conditions that they are finding um
there have been some indications there
was a leaked document uh a few weeks ago
that usaid had sent forward to the state
department in the White House in which
they cataloged much of the obstruction
that they've been seeing from the
Israeli government that that was part of
this process uh by the US government of
assessing whether Israel's conduct has
been in line with international law um
you know usaid's findings that were
reported in that leaked document
indicate that at least you know they
don't they don't see Israel's Behavior
as compliant with that but ultimately
that decision is one for President Biden
and he will take usaid's advice in kind
of in stride along with other parts of
the government okay so let's talk about
what's going on with Rafer at the moment
we have now it seems Israelis in charge
of the border crossing km Abu Salam is
closed this is now a dire situation
isn't it for any Aid agency both within
Gaza and outside of it trying to work
out how they can try and help in any
shape or
form yeah it's it's really tragic uh
things had been
improving very modestly since the strike
on the world Central Kitchen Convoy um
the Israeli government had shown a bit
more flexibility on allowing Aid access
to the north there had been more food
getting into the north uh there had been
slightly more Aid getting into Gaza
generally over the past few weeks this
obviously puts a very abrupt halt to
almost all of that um it means things
are now moving again in the wrong
direction both the uh km Shalom and the
Rafa cross have been closed for the last
few days and obviously if there is a
full offensive operation in Rafa which
the the Israeli government has been
promising for some time that would risk
the collapse of what remains of the
famine relief operation no Aid by land
but the US has invested in this pier at
Ash DOD thinking that Aid might be able
to come in via the sea but if Israel has
a veto on what comes into the Gaza Strip
that's also a futile exercise as well
isn't it certainly for the
US I wouldn't quite say futile but
definitely it falls short of what is
needed I mean you know the Israel
inspection regime has been excessive and
arbitrary and has blocked a lot of
standard humanitarian critically and
standard humanitarian items from getting
in so you know one example of that is
water purification tabs in every crisis
that I've where I've worked where you
have a crisis of access to Queen water
which is very much the case in Gaza
right now because so much of the water
infrastructure has either been turned
off or destroyed uh over the course of
the war you would then distribute water
purification tablets to households so
that they can take a bucket take dirty
water and then use those tabs to purify
it those tabs contain chlorine that's a
standard you know standard for for
purifying water but because they contain
chlorine the Israeli government has
blocked them in inspections and it's
going to one small but I thinkt telling
and indicative example of how excessive
the inspections have been and how much
that that is hampering the the effort
Jeremy it's really good to get your
Insight thank you very much uh for your
perspective Jeremy conik there from
refugees International uh joining us in
Washington DC thank you thank
you make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al